[RFC] thinLTO for SYCL (#15083)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/design/ThinLTO.md

memory footprint, and differs from the linking flow for AMD and NVIDIA devices.

## Summary
SYCL ThinLTO will hook into the existing community mechanism to run LTO as part 
of device linking inside `clang-linker-wrapper`. We split the device images 
early at compilation time, and at link time we use ThinLTO's function importing 
feature
to bring in the defintions for referenced functions. Only the new offload model
is supported.

## Device code compilation time changes
Most of the changes for ThinLTO occur during device link time, however there is 
one major change during compilation (-c) time: we now run device code split 
during compilaton instead of linking.
The main reason for doing this is increased parallelization. Many compilation 
jobs can be run at the same time, but linking happens once total for the 
application. Device code split is currently a common source of performance 
issues.

Splitting early means that the resulting IR after splitting is not complete, it 
still may contain calls to functions (user code and/or the SYCL device 
libraries) from other object files.

We rely on the assumption that all function defintions matching a declaration 

> will be the same and we can let ThinLTO pull in any one.

Author: I think it depends what the original IR linkage is. if the original IR is `linkonce_odr` or something similar I think yes, but I don't know if we can guarantee every SYCL function will have that linkage (at least for libdevice it not this way in syclos HEAD)

For example, let's start with user device code that defines a `SYCL_EXTERNAL` 
function `foo` in translation unit `tu_foo`. There is also another translation 
unit `tu_bar` that references `foo`.
During the early device code splitting run of `tu_foo`, we may find that more 
than one of the resultant device images contain a defintion for `foo`.

We assert that any function defintion for `foo` that is deemed a match by the 
ThinLTO infrastruction during the processing of `tu_bar` is valid.

As a result of running early device code split, the fat object file generated 

> as part of device compilation may contain multiple device code images.

Author: After split, the linkage should be the same as it was before split.

After ThinLTO runs, it could have the same linkage as after splitting or it could be internalized (not yet implemented)

I don't think there is any way to get multiple kernel definitions in a way that isn't already possible with splitting. Maybe @AlexeySachkov has an idea.

> as part of device compilation may contain multiple device code images.

Reviewer: > After split, the linkage should be the same as it was before split.

I'm not 100% sure, but this might cause "multiple definition" problem. `tu_foo` has only one `foo` definition so using `external` is fine (assuming that all other modules referencing `foo` use different linkage types), but after split we will have `foo` defined in multiple modules. I'm not sure if LLVM allows linking modules where `foo` will have `external` linkage type.

> as part of device compilation may contain multiple device code images.

Reviewer 2: > I don't think there is any way to get multiple kernel definitions in a way that isn't already possible with splitting. Maybe @AlexeySachkov has an idea.

We shouldn't ever duplicate kernels in our compiler stack, that won't be properly handled at RT for multiple reasons.

and which device image contains which kernel is different with ThinLTO
enabled, but we do expect this to have any impact on correctness or
performance, nor we do expect users to care.

# Current limitations

`-O0`: Compiling with `-O0` prevent clang from generating ThinLTO metadata 
during the compilation phase. In the current implementation, this is an error. 
In the final version, we could either silently fall back to full LTO or 
generate ThinLTO metadata even for `-O0`.

SYCL libdevice: Current all `libdevice` functions are explicitly marked to be 
weak symbols. The ThinLTO framework does not consider a defintion of function 
with weak linkage as it cannot be sure that this definiton is the correct one. 
Ideally we could remove the weak symbol annotation.

No binary linkage: The SPIR-V target does not currently have a production 
quality binary linker. This means that we must generate a fully linked image as 
part of device linkage. At least for AMD devices, this is not a requirement as 
`lld` is used for the final link which can resolve any unresolved symbols. 
`-fno-gpu-rdc` is default for AMD, so in that case it can call `lld` during 

> compile, but if `-fno-gpu-rdc` is passed, the lld call happens as part of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compile, but if `-fgpu-rdc` is passed, the lld call happens as part of 
```

Author: pulled your branch, thanks!

# ThinLTO for SYCL

This document describes the purpose and design of ThinLTO for SYCL.

**NOTE**: This is not the final version. The document is still in progress.

## Background

With traditional SYCL device code linking, all user code is linked together
along with device libraries into a single huge module and then split and
processed by `sycl-post-link`. This requires sequential processing, has a large
memory footprint, and differs from the linking flow for AMD and NVIDIA devices.

## Summary

SYCL ThinLTO will hook into the existing community mechanism to run LTO as part
of device linking inside `clang-linker-wrapper`. We split the device images
early at compilation time, and at link time we use ThinLTO's function importing
feature to bring in the definitions for referenced functions. Only the new
offload model is supported.

## Device code compilation time changes

Most of the changes for ThinLTO occur during device link time, however there is

> one major change during compilation (-c) time: we now run device code split

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
one major change during compilation (`-c`) time: we now run device code split
```

during compilation instead of linking. The main reason for doing this is
increased parallelization. Many compilation jobs can be run at the same time,
but linking happens once total for the application. Device code split is
currently a common source of performance issues.

> Splitting early means that the resulting IR after splitting is not complete, it

Reviewer 2: I don't think that early split leads to incomplete modules. Lack of linking leads to incomplete modules, i.e. a single translation unit with a call to undefined `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function is incomplete regardless of whether we split it or not.

If it was complete, then current version of the splitting mechanism won't break it, i.e. every resulting module would still be complete (at the cost of code duplication). However, I'm not 100% about the latter, if shared libraries are involved, that behavior definitely changes.

Author: sorry, you're right, let me reword it

still may contain calls to functions (user code and/or the SYCL device
libraries) defined in other translation units.

We rely on the assumption that all function definitions matching a declaration
will be the same and we can let ThinLTO pull in any one.

For example, let's start with user device code that defines a `SYCL_EXTERNAL`
function `foo` in translation unit `tu_foo`. There is also another translation
unit `tu_bar` that references `foo`. During the early device code splitting run
of `tu_foo`, we may find that more than one of the resultant device images

> contain a definition for `foo`.

Reviewer 2: Should we clarify the reason why `foo` could be duplicated? I'm not sure if that's obvious for a person who is not familiar with device code split details.

Also, we have a flag (originally introduced to support shared libraries) which allows to disable cloning of functions which are shared between device images produced by code splitting. We could probably use that mode for thinLTO to avoid unnecessary duplicates.

Author: will add this, thanks

We assert that any function definition for `foo` that is deemed a match by the
ThinLTO infrastructure during the processing of `tu_bar` is valid.

As a result of running early device code split, the fat object file generated as
part of device compilation may contain multiple device code images.

## Device code link time changes

Before we go into the link time changes for SYCL, let's understand the device

> linking flow for AMD/NVIDIA devices:

Reviewer 2: I read this phrase as **SYCL** linking flow for AMD/NVIDIA devices, but if that reading is correct, then requirement (2) looks weird, because it is not dependent on a device.

Perhaps this phrase was referring to upstream handling of OpenMP offloading?

Author: yeah it's for omp, will reword. thanks

![Community linking flow](images/ThinLTOCommunityFlow.svg)

SYCL has two differentiating requirements:

1) The SPIR-V backend is not production ready and the SPIR-V translator is used.
2) The SYCL runtime requires metadata (module properties and module symbol
table) computed from device images that will be stored along the device images
in the fat executable.

The effect of requirement 1) is that instead of letting ThinLTO call the SPIR-V
backend, we add a callback that runs right before CodeGen would run. In that
callback, we call the SPIR-V translator and store the resultant file path for

> use later, and we instruct the ThinLTO framework to not perform CodeGen.

Reviewer 2: Note: we should be able to call the translator as a library and store the final binary (in form of a `MemoryBuffer`, I assume) instead of file path. The former is supposedly more in line with what happens in the upstream.

If we only process the device code that was included in the original fat object
input to `clang-linker-wrapper`, we will miss devicelib calls in referenced
`SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions.

The effect of requirement 2) is that we store the fully linked device image for
metadata computation in the SYCL-specific handing code after the ThinLTO
framework has completed. Another option would be to try to compute the metadata
inside the ThinLTO framework callbacks, but this would require SYCL-specific
arguments to many caller functions in the stack and pollute community code.

Here is the current ThinLTO flow for SYCL:

![SYCL linking flow](images/ThinLTOSYCLFlow.svg)

We add a `PreCodeGenModuleHook` function to the `LTOConfig` object so that we
can process the fully linked module without running the backend.

However, the flow is not ideal for many reasons:

1) We are relying on the external `llvm-spirv` tool instead of the SPIR-V
backend. We could slightly improve this issue by using a library call to the
SPIR-V translator instead of the tool, however the library API requires setting
up an object to represent the arguments while we only have strings, and it's

> non-trivial to parse the strings to figure out how to create the argument

Reviewer 2: Am I right that you are talking about extensions here?

I don't think that it is necessarily non-trivial. If what we get from clang driver is what we should pass to `llvm-spirv`, then we can simply copy an existing function from `llvm-spirv` which does this parsing:

https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-LLVM-Translator/blob/main/tools/llvm-spirv/llvm-spirv.cpp#L516

Author: it's not just that, if it were the extensions it would be not that bad.

let's consider the flag `llvm-spirv` flag `spirv-max-version`. This is a `cl::opt` global variable and is set in `llvm-spirv`'s main by parsing argv as is standard.

In `clang-linker-wrapper`, this is just 
If we want to set the same flag, we would need to somehow get that same global variable set, either by externing it and seting it ourselves (which means we need to parse the strings from the driver and map them to a global variable as well as all the enum mappings for the options). Doing that for all options is what I meant by non-trivial. 

If I missed some obvious easy way of doing it let me know

Reviewer 2: > let's consider the flag `llvm-spirv` flag `--spirv-max-version`. This is a `cl::opt` global variable `MaxSPIRVVersion` and is set in `llvm-spirv`'s main by parsing argv as is standard.

Do we have a public `clang` driver flag which allows to set maximum SPIR-V version? If not, do we pass different values of that option to the translator based on some other flags?

I guess my high-level point is: do we really have to pass all those flags through the linker-wrapper, or can we just come up with their values _within_ clang-linker wrapper based on the module itself?
That point of view stems from the fact that I don't really know which flags to the translator are currently "dynamic" and my assumption (which could be wrong one) that we don't have that many "dynamic" options which would actually require any handling.

Author: Sorry, ` --spirv-max-version` was just a random option I picked, that one in particular might always have the same value. But even if it does, we need to implement some way to get that global variable inside the `llvm-spirv` library set.
Even if `clang-linker-wrapper` knows all the options that need to be passed, we need to come up with how to set all the globals which seems flaky.

The consensuses from other reviewers here is to just use the SPIR-V backend now since it is apparently pretty good, so I'm not planning to use the translator anymore.

Reviewer 2: You seem to be talking about how to initialize globals within `llvm-spirv/main.cpp` (or whatever  name of the file is), but that shouldn't be necessary. API entry points accept all those options via `TranslatorOpts` object. The translator library does not use any globals to access options

Author: Sorry, you're right, I'm too tried. Still, having to parse the strings from the driver and map it to the getter/setter for the object seems not ideal.

object. Since we plan to use the SPIR-V backend in the long term, this does not
seem to be worth the effort.

2) We manually run passes inside `PreCodeGenModuleHook`. This is because we
don't run CodeGen, so we can't take advantage of the `PreCodeGenPassesHook`
field of `LTOConfig` to run some custom passes, as those passes are only run
when we actually are going to run CodeGen.

3) We have to store the fully linked module. This is needed because we need a
fully linked module to accurately compute metadata, see the above explanation of
SYCL requirement 2). We could get around storing the module by computing the
metadata inside the LTO framework and storing it for late use by the SYCL
bundling code, but doing this would require even more SYCL-only customizations
including even more new function arguments and modifications of the

> `OffloadFile` class. There are also compilations because the LTO framework is

Reviewer 2: Why would it require modifications to `OffloadFile`? I mean, it doesn't seem to have an accessor to `StringData` map stored by `OffloadBinary` contained within `OffloadFile`, but adding such a getter method doesn't seem too SYCL-specific

> multithreaded, and not all LLVM data structures are thread safe.

Reviewer 2: It is not clear to me what is there that requires multithreading when each thinLTO thread should be working on its own resulting module alone. Or am I missing something?

The proposed long-term SYCL ThinLTO flow is as follows:

![SYCL SPIR-V backend linking flow](images/ThinLTOSYCLSPIRVBackendFlow.svg)

The biggest difference here is that we are running CodeGen using the SPIR-V
backend.

Also, instead of using a lambda function in the `PreCodeGenModuleHook` callback
to run SYCL finalization passes, we can take advantage of the
`PreCodeGenPassesHook` field to add passes to the pass manager that the LTO

> framework will run.

Reviewer 2: I got confused by this paragraph, because it contradicts some previous statement. Does it make sense to create sub-sections for short- and long-term designs of thinLTO to better split those two descriptions?

It is possible that the number of device images in the fat executable and which
device image contains which kernel is different with ThinLTO enabled, but we do

> expect this to have any impact on correctness or performance, nor we do expect

Reviewer 2: "but we do expect this..." - missing "not"?

Author: yep, thx

users to care.

## Current limitations

`-O0`: Compiling with `-O0` prevent clang from generating ThinLTO metadata
during the compilation phase. In the current implementation, this is an error.
In the final version, we could either silently fall back to full LTO or generate
ThinLTO metadata even for `-O0`.

SYCL libdevice: Current all `libdevice` functions are explicitly marked to be
weak symbols. The ThinLTO framework does not consider a definition of function
with weak linkage as it cannot be sure that this definition is the correct one.
Ideally we could remove the weak symbol annotation.

No binary linkage: The SPIR-V target does not currently have a production
quality binary linker. This means that we must generate a fully linked image as

> part of device linkage. At least for AMD devices, this is not a requirement as

Reviewer 2: SPIR-V may be incomplete, there is nothing in the standard which disallows that. However, producing incomplete SPIR-V  modules in the compiler will require SYCL RT changes so that SYCL RT can pass a set of SPIR-V modules into device JIT compiler which when linked together produce a complete module.
